@site and @navroot endpoints (#1465)
plone/plone.restapi: docs/source/endpoints/navroot.md

This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because it allows the site manager to restrict searches or navigation queries to a specific location in the site.

This navigation root information is different depending on the context of the request.
For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder such as `www.domain.com/en`, the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site such as `www.domain.com` and the navigation root will be `/`.

To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint.
For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint at the root of the site:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.req
```

The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

> If you request the `@navroot` of a given content type of the site:

Reviewer: "Content type" refers to a category, not a specific instance of the type.
```suggestion
If you request the `@navroot` of a given content item in the site:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information in the context of that content item:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site, the root of the site will work as usual:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information of the root for the site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information of the root of the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site where the language folder is the navigation root, the response has the language folder information:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_folder_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information for the language folder:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.req
```

The response has the language folder information as a navigation root:

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.resp
:language: http
```

(navigation-root-expansion-label)=

## Expansion

This endpoint can be used with the {doc}`expansion` mechanism which allows getting more information about a content item in one query, avoiding unnecessary requests.

If a simple `GET` request is made on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.

In a standard site when querying the site root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.req
```

The response will contain information of the site root with the navigation expanded:

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

> When querying a content type inside the root:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When querying a content item inside the root:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.req
```

> The response will contain the information of that content type and navigation root with the site expanded:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response will contain the information of that content item with its navigation root information expanded:
```

---
html_meta:
  "description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:description": "Navigation root is a concept that provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, and breadcrumbs in Plone."
  "property=og:title": "Navigation Root"
  "keywords": "Plone, plone.restapi, REST, API, site, navigation root"
---

(navigation-root-label)=

# Navigation root

Plone has a concept called {term}`navigation root` which provides a way to root catalog queries, searches, breadcrumbs, and so on in a given section of the site.
This feature is useful when working with subsites or multilingual sites, because it allows the site manager to restrict searches or navigation queries to a specific location in the site.

This navigation root information is different depending on the context of the request.

> For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder (`www.domain.com/en`), the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, in a default multilingual site when browsing the contents inside a language folder such as `www.domain.com/en`, the context is `en` and its navigation root will be `/en/`.
```

In a non-multilingual site, the context is the root of the site (`www.domain.com`) and the navigation root will be `/`.

> To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint, which will return the correct information about it.

Reviewer 2: Remove redundant clause.

```suggestion
To get the information about the navigation root, the REST API has a `@navroot` contextual endpoint.
```

> For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint in the root of the site:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, send a `GET` request to the `@navroot` endpoint at the root of the site:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get.resp
:language: http
```

In a multilingual site (where the language root folders are navigation root objects), the endpoint will work in a similar way.

If you request the `@navroot` of a given content type in the site:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information with the site:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information for the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get.resp
:language: http

> ```

Reviewer 2: Check the preceding request and response in the preview (https://deploy-preview-1465--plone-restapi.netlify.app/endpoints/navroot.html). I don't see a language root such as `/en/` for these examples, even though the narrative text claims it is multilingual.

Author: Just in this paragraph I didn't want to talk about multilingual, but the sentence of then 34th line creates confusion. I just want to say that you can request the @navroot of any content on the site, and you will get the response. 

I will delete the 34th line sentence (`In a multilingual site where the language root folders are navigation root objects, the endpoint will work in a similar way.`) because it is somehow a duplicate of a later line (`In a multilingual site, the root of the site will work as usual`), and I will merge both of them.

In a multilingual site, the root of the site will work as usual:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.req
```

> The response will contain the navigation root information of the root of the site:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response will contain the navigation root information of the root for the site:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_site_get.resp
:language: http

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same as previous comment. There is no language root of `/en/`.

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_lang_content_get.resp
:language: http
```

(navigation-root-expansion-label)=

## Expansion

This endpoint can be used with the {doc}`expansion` mechanism which allows getting more information about a content item in one query, avoiding unnecessary requests.

If a simple `GET` request is done on the content item, a new entry will be shown on the `@components` entry with the URL of the `@navroot` endpoint.

In a standard site when querying the site root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.req
```

The response will contain information of the site root with the navigation expanded:

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

When querying a content type inside the root:

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.req
```

> The response will contain the information of that content and navigation root information with the site expanded:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response will contain the information of that content type and navigation root with the site expanded:
```

```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/navroot_standard_site_content_get_expansion.resp
:language: http
```

> In a multilingual site, it will work similarly. This will be the request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a multilingual site, it works the same.
Use the request:
```

```{eval-rst}
..  http:example:: curl httpie python-requests
    :request: ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.req
```

And the response will contain the navigation root information pointing to the root of the site:

> ```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.resp

Reviewer 2: Check the path. This literalinclude file does not show up in the rendered preview.

![Screen Shot 2023-04-12 at 4 34 40 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/231445137-2436fc5e-7484-4e93-a64c-f4c48467e03d.png)

Reviewer 2: I see it now. Yay!

> ```{literalinclude} ../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.resp

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:

```suggestion
```{literalinclude} ../../../src/plone/restapi/tests/http-examples/site_get_expand_navroot.resp
```
